                    MASS STORAGE STRUCTURE              
Magnetic Disks 
Magnetic diskt provide the bulk of secondary storage for modern 
computer systems. 

There may be thousands of concentric cylinders in a disk driva and 
each tracks may contain hundereds of sectors. The storage capacity 
of common disk drives is measured in gigabytes. 

SOLID STATE DISK (SSD)
Simply described an SSD is nonvolatile memory that is used like a 
hard drive. 

MAGNETIC TYPES  
Tapes are used mainly for backup for storag of infrequently used 
information, and as a medium for transferring information from one 
system to another. 

DISK STRUCTURE 
Modern magnetic disk drives are addressed as large one-dimensional 
arrays of LOGICAL BLOCKS, where the logical block is the smallest 
unit of transfer. The size of a logical block is ususally 512 bytes. 

The one-dimesional array of logical blocks is mapped onto the sectors 
of the disk sequentially. 


Disk yuvarlak donen bir yapi uzerinden veri okundugu icin veri okuyan 
kisim iceri dogru geldikce donme basina okunan sector veya veri 
miktari azalir. Bu azalmayi engellemek icin diskin donme hizi artabilir 
veya daha az veri okunmasina izin verilebilir (constant angular velocity). 


DISK ATTACHMENT 
Computers access disk storage in two ways. One way is via I/O ports 
or HOST-ATTACHED STORAGE this is common on small systems. The other 
way is via a remote host in a distributed file system this is referred 
to as NETWORK-ATTACHED STORAGE. 

HOST ATTACHED STORAGE (storage arrays)
Host attached storage is storage accessed through local I/O pors. These 
ports use several technologies.

STORAGE ARRAY NETWORK
SAN is one or more storage arrays connected together. 


NETWORK ATTACHED STORAGE
A network attached storage device is a special purpose storage system 
that is accessed remotely over a data network. Clients access network 
attached storage via a remote procedure call interface such as NFS
for UNIX systems or CIFS for Windows machines. 


                        DISK SCHEDULING 
For the magnetic disks the SEEK TIME is the time for the disk arm to 
move the heads to the cylinder containing the desired sector. The 
ROTATIONAL LATENCY is the additional time for the disk to rotate the
desired sector to the disk head. 


If the desired disk drive and controller are available, the request 
can be serviced immediately. If the drive or controller is busy, any 
new requests for service will be placed in the queue of pending request
for that drive. 

Any one of the several disk-scheduling algortims can be used to choose 
one of the waiting jobs from the waiting queue. 


FCFS SCHEDULING 
First Come First Served yaklasiminda ilk gelen ilk hizmeti alir. 


SSTF SCHEDULING
It seems reasonable to service all the requests close to the current
head position before moving the head far away to service other requests. 
This assumption is the basis for the SHORTHEST-SEEK-TIME=FIRST (SSTF)
algorithm. The SSTF algorithm selects the reqest with the least seek 
time from the curret head position.  


SCAN SCHEDULING
In the SCAN ALGORITHM, the disk arm starts at one end of the disk 
and moves toward the other end, servicing requests as it reaches each 
cylinder, until it gets to the other end of the disk. At the other end 
the direction of head movement is revrsed and servicing continues. 


C-SCAN Scheduling 
Like SCAN, C-SCAN moves the head from one end of the disk to the other 
servicing requests along the way. When the head reaches the other end 
however it immediately returns to the beginnig of the disk without 
servicing any request on the return trip. 


LOOK SCHEDULING
More commonly the arm goes only as far as the final request in each 
direction. Then it reverses direction immediately without goind all 
the way to the end of the disk. Versions of SCAN and C-SCAN that follow 
this pattern are called LOOK and C-LOOK scheduling, because they look 
for a request before continuing to move in a given direction. 


                SELECTING A DISK SCHEDULING ALGORITHM 
The disk-scheduling algorithm should be written as a separate module 
of the operating system alllowing it to be replaced with a different 
algorithm if necessary. 



                        DISK MANAGEMENT 
DISK FORMATTING 
Before a disk can store data it must be divided into sectors that the 
disk controller can read and write. This process is called low-level 
fromatting, or physical formatting. 


BOOT BLOCK 
The initial BOOTSTRAP program tends to be simple. It initializes all 
aspects of the system, from CPU registers to device controllers and 
the contencts of main memory and then start the operating system. 

For most computers the bootstrap is stored in read-only memory ROM. 
A disk that has a boot partition is called A BOOT DISK or SYSTEM DISK. 

Store bootstrap loader in the boot Rom whose only job is to bring in
a full bootstrap program from disk. the full bootstrap program can be 
changed easily a new version is simply written onto the disk. 


The Windows systems places its boot code in the first sector on the
hard disk, which it terms the master boot record. or MBR. Boooting 
begins by running code that is resident in the systems ROM memory. 
This code directs the system to read the boot code from the MBR. 
In addition to containing boot code, the MBR contains a table listing 
the partitions fo the hard disk and a falg indicating which partition 
the system is to be booted from. Once the system identifies the boot 
partition, it reads the first sector from that partition  and continues 
with the remainder of the boot process, which includes loading the various
subsystems and system services.


                        SWAP-SPACE MANAGEMENT 


































