INTRODUCTION TO THE RELATIONAL MODEL

RELATIONAL DATA MODEL
    A relational database consists of a collection of tables, each of which 
    is assigned a unique name.

    => In relational model the term relation is used to refer to a table . 
    => The tuple is used to refer to a row. 
    => The term attribute refers to a column of table. 
    => Relation istanace is refer to a specific instance of a relation 



DATABASE SCHEMA 
    => database schema is the logical design of the database.
     
    => Database Instance is a snapshot of the data in the database 
        at a given instant in time. 

    
    => In general a relation schema consist of a list of attributes and their 
    corrsponding domains. Aslinda her tablo bir relationdur diyebiliriz 



KEYS 
    Superkey 
        A superkey is a set of one or more attributes that, taken collectively
        allow us to identify uniquely a tuplle in the relation

    
    Candidate keys 
        Such minimal superkeys are called candidate keys. 
        if id is candidate key alone , then id,name do not candidate key 
        because id already candidate by itself. 


    Primary key 
        One of the candidate keys choosen as primary key to distinguish 
        elements in a relation. 


        Primary keys should choosen very carefully that its value never or 
        very very rarely changes 


    Foreign key 
        A relation say r1 may include among its attributes the primary key 
        of another realation say r2. This attribute is called a FOREIGN KEY. 
        r1 referencing r2. 

        r1 is also called referencing relation 
        r2 is called referenced relation 


    REFERENTIAL INTEGRITY 
        A referential integrity constraint requires that the values appearing 
        in specified attributes of any tuple in the referencing relation also
        appear in specified attributes of at least one tuple in the referenced 
        relation



    Schema Diagrams 

        A database schema along with primary key and foeigh key dependencies 
        can be depicted by schema diagrams. 

        schema diagrams consists from relations 
        

    RELATIONAL QUERY LANGUAGES 
        A query language is a language in qhich a user request informatin 
        from the database. 

        PROCEDURAL language requires instructions to perform a sequence 
        of operations on the database to comput the desired result. 

        NONPROCEDURAL language does not require the instructions it just 
        need commands to do. SQL IS NONPROCEDURAL LANGUAGE. 


        The relational algebra is procedural whereas the tuple relational 
        clculus and domain relational calculus are nonprocedural. 


    JOIN 
        the join operation allows the combining of two relations by merging 
        pairs of tuples, one from each relation into a single tuple. 

        Natural join tablolarin elemanlarinin birbirleri ile ayni olan 
        elemanlari varsa bu elemanlari birbirleri ile birlestirerek yeni bir 
        tabloda tuple olrak kaydeder ve sonuc olarak bu tabloyu dondurur. 


    CARTESIAN PRODUCT 
        combines tuples from two relations but unlike the join operation 
        its reasult contains all pairs of tuples from two relations reagrdless
        of whether heir attribute values match. 

    Union 
        union operation perform normal set union of two similarly structured 
        tables/

    

    RELATIONAL ALGEBRA 
        Relational algebra defines a set of operations on relations paralelling 
        the usual algebraic operations such as addition substraction .

        Selection 
        Projection 
        Natural join 
        Cartesian Product 
        Union 













































